# Amoebas_cAMP_Secretion
An interesting form of collective system is demonstrated by Dictyostelium discoideum and its multicellular development process.

Dictyostelium discoideum (myxamoebae)  is a social amoeba able to change its behaviour to survive in response to nutrient starvation. Most of its life, the organism lives in soil as a single amoeba and feeds on bacteria. Individual cells move around on their own when there is plenty of food. Then, when food is scarce, the cells start a multicellular developmental process. Up to a million amoeboid cells artfully self-aggregate via pattern formation (first-order emergent behaviour) to build a coherent and cohesive super-organism, similar to a motile slug structure. This complex super-organism has several properties that none of the cells has on its own (e.g. sensitivity to light and heat). The slug moves as a whole (second-order emergent behaviour) looking for a suitable place to transform into a fruiting body in which about 20% of the cells die to lift the remaining cells up to a better place for sporulation and dispersal on surface of the soil. Interestingly, at this point the cells resume their individual behaviour.

D. discoideum life cycle is an excellent example of emergent phenomenon. These characteristics inspire us to investigate the relation between first-order and higher-order collective behaviours in terms of emergence. Second- order emergent behaviour arises from the interactions of individuals, which are themselves the result of first- order emergent societies.

Additionally, this social, relatively simple but yet powerful, behaviour is particularly appealing to inspire the engineering of swarm robotics, where a large number of simple homogeneous robots coordinate, self-organise and adapt themselves to environmental changes.

Starvation induces a several different new genes, whose are really necessary for aggregation of individual cells. Their new and unique abilities such as synthesise, detect, and degrade cAMP are critical for aggregation. Surely, in the growing amoebae, none of these capacities exists and all are induced as the cells starve.

Its life cycle starts from aggregation phase, then after some transformation hundred of starved amoebae become a slug. Then, each slug orientates itself towards the light and temperature. Eventually, every slug culminates in a fruiting body consisting of a globule of spore cells on a slender stalk.

Although several D. discoideum genes are homologous to human genes, it is not the only reason, which makes this eukaryotic organism a well studied model. There are other reasons, such as simplicity of its short life cycle; excellent model of cells movement, of intercellular chemical signalling during the developmental process and emergence of plasticity during the development process. 

On the biology field, although D. discoideum provides a promising research path, not all phases are currently understood and modelled at the micro-level. From the computer science and artificial systems perspectives, first- order emergence is well studied, but higher-order levels of emergent behaviour have not received many attention yet. Finally, from the swarm robotics perspective, there is no attempt at applying higher-order emergent behaviour into swarms of robots.
